Modify rule S1854: Expand and adjust for LaYC (#3150)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S1854/cfamily/rule.adoc

Unused assignments should be removed.

== Why is this an issue?

> Assigning a value to a local variable that is not read by any subsequent instruction is called a _dead store_.

Reviewer: In the first paragraph, I would summarize in 1 or 2 sentences *why* this is an issue.
Something like "The only utility of assigning a value to a variable is to use this value later in the code. If it is never used, there is no need for the assignment. The presence of a useless assignment indicates misaligned intentions and is most likely an error". But preferably shorter.

Reviewer: Your sentence after the snippet does the job well:

> Computing or retrieving a value only to then immediately overwrite it or throw it away indicates serious logic errors in the code.

> The following code snippet depicts a dead store.

Reviewer: IMO, this snippet contains too much code irrelevant to the issue.
I would limit it to ~5 lines. I would also add multiple snippets:
- assignment
  - the variable is never mentioned again
  - the variable is immediately overwritten
- increment (that you have)
- initialization

Perhaps most of them should be moved to the "noncompliant example"s

Therefore, unused values and superfluous code should be removed to prevent logic errors.

== What is the potential impact?

Not only do unused values and superfluous code make the program unnecessary complex, but also indicate significant logic errors.
And even in the absence of logic errors, they waste computing resources in case the compiler is not able to optimize them away.

Unused values typically showcase a discrepancy between what a developer intended and what is specified in the code and should be removed to uncover and eventually prevent logic errors.

== How to fix it

Remove unused values and superfluous code.

=== Code examples

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
int bar();
int buz();

int foo(bool b) {
  int x = 0;
  if (b) {
    x = bar();
    return x;
  }
  if (x != 0) {
    int y = buz();
    y += 9001; // Noncompliant: dead store
  }
  return x;
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
int bar();
int buz();

int foo(bool b) {
  int x = 0;
  if (b) {
    x = bar();
    return x;
  }
  // Compliant: no more dead stores and superfluous code
  return x;
}
----

> 

Reviewer: It looks like you are missing a bunch of "Noncompliant code example" headers

Author: Ups, yes I do.

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
long factorial(const long n) {
  long f = 1;
  for (long i = 1; i <= n; ++i) {
    f *= i;
  }
  return f;

> }

Reviewer: Given that `factorial` is not the point of the example, I would choose a shorter function, e.g. 
```
long twice(long n) {
  return n*2;
}
```

Author: I've removed the function altogether since our rule does not try to reason about side effects.

long foo(long n) {
  // Noncompliant: `factorial`'s return value is unused and `factorial` has no side effects

>   factorial(n);

Reviewer: Does our rule detect this too?

Author: Sadly, it doesn't. I've simplified this example.

Unused assignments should be removed.

== Why is this an issue?

Computing or retrieving a value only to then immediately overwrite it or throw it away indicates serious logic errors in the code.

Assigning a value to a local variable that is not read by any subsequent instruction is called a _dead store_.
The following code snippet depicts a dead store.

[source,cpp]
----
int foo() {

>   int x = 0;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  int x = 0; // Noncompliant: dead store, next line overwrites x
```

Unused values typically showcase a discrepancy between what a developer intended and what is specified in the code and should be removed to uncover and eventually prevent logic errors.

== How to fix it

Remove unused values and superfluous code.

=== Code examples

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
int foo(int y) {
  int x = 0;
  x = 100; // Noncompliant: dead store
  x = 200;
  return x + y;
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
int foo(int y) {
  int x = 200; // Compliant: no unnecessary assignment
  return x + y;
}
----

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
int bar();
int buz();

int foo(bool b) {
  int x = 0;
  if (b) {
    x = bar();
    return x;
  }
  if (x != 0) {
    int y = buz();
    y += 9001; // Noncompliant: dead store
  }
  return x;
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=compliant]
----
int bar();
int buz();

int foo(bool b) {
  int x = 0;
  if (b) {
    x = bar();
    return x;
  }

>   // Compliant: no more dead stores and superfluous code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // Compliant: no more dead stores and superfluous code
  // Assuming call to buz() had no important side effects
```

  return x;
}
----

=== Pitfalls

> When removing unused values and superfluous code, make sure that the right-hand side of a given assignment has no side effects that update the program's state.

Reviewer: This is either a tautology or it is not complete: if you consider files on disk and the network packets as part of program state, than any side effect update program's state. If you don't, you should still consider these side effects even though they do not update program's state
```suggestion
When removing unused values and superfluous code, make sure that the right-hand side of a given assignment has no side effects.
```

While it is safe to remove the call to `square` in the following code since it has no side effects, removing the call to `fwrite` changes the program's behavior.
Still, values that are never read such as `n_items` indicate code smells that should be mitigated.
In this code example, the return value of `fwrite` should be checked and any potential error should be handled appropriately.

[source,cpp]
----
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>

int square(int n) {
  return n * n;
}

int foo(int i) {
  int sq = square(i); // Noncompliant: dead store, assignment can be removed
  const char* const str = "Hello, World!\n";

>   size_t n_items = fwrite(str, sizeof(char), strlen(str), stdout); // Noncompliant: `n_items` is never read, but the call has side effects

Reviewer: this line is long.
I am not sure whether you can place the `Noncompliant` comment on the previous one, but you certainly can put the explanation in a separate comment on another line.

  return important_error_info::CRITICAL;
}

void caller() {
  foo(); // compiler warns on discarding a nodiscard value
  bar(); // compiler will issue no warning
  buz(); // compiler warns on discarding a nodiscard value
  compute(); // compiler warns on discarding a nodiscard value
}
----

In case, the return value of a function marked as `nodiscard` should be (exceptionally) ignored, a cast to `void` can be used to silence the compiler warning as shown in the following:

[source,cpp]
----
[[nodiscard]] int foo() { return 100; }

void caller() {
  foo(); // compiler warns on discarding a nodiscard value
  (void)foo(); // compiler will issue no warning
}
----

== Resources

=== Standards

* CERT - https://wiki.sei.cmu.edu/confluence/x/39UxBQ[MSC13-C. Detect and remove unused values]
* CERT - https://wiki.sei.cmu.edu/confluence/x/9DZGBQ[MSC56-J. Detect and remove superfluous code and values]
* CWE - https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/563[563 - Assignment to Variable without Use ('Unused Variable')]

=== Related rules

* S1763 detects unreachable code
* S2583 ensures that conditionally executed code is reachable
* S2589 detects gratuitous boolean expressions

> * S3516 ensures that function returns are not invariant

Reviewer: IMO, "function returns" as a noun, while grammatically correct, is pretty surprising and "function returns are" makes most readers stumble
```suggestion
* S3516 ensures that a function returns non-invariant
```

Author: Fair point.

Unused assignments should be removed.

== Why is this an issue?

Computing or retrieving a value only to then immediately overwrite it or throw it away indicates a serious logic error in the code.

Assigning a value to a local variable that is not read by any subsequent instruction is called a _dead store_.

> The following code snippet depicts a dead store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following code snippet depicts a few dead stores.
```

[source,cpp]
----
int foo() {
  int x = 0; // Noncompliant: dead store, next line overwrites x
  x = 100; // Noncompliant: dead store, next line overwrites x
  x = 200;
  int y = 0;
  y += 9001; // Noncompliant: dead store, y is never used
  int z = 300; // Noncompliant: dead store, next line overwrites z
  z = 400;
  return x + z * 2;
}
----

> Even if the unnecessary operations do not do any harm in terms of the program's correctness, they are--at best--a waste of computing resources.
> Therefore, unused values and superfluous code should be removed to prevent logic errors.

Reviewer: The second sentence does not really follow from the first (which does not mention logic errors, and even seem to argue otherwise).
```suggestion
Even if the unnecessary operations do not do any harm in terms of the program's correctness, they are--at best--a waste of computing resources.
In most cases, the operations have their intended use but it is not expressed in the code correctly.
Therefore, unused values and superfluous code should be removed to prevent logic errors.
```
Or something similar.

== What is the potential impact?

Not only do unused values and superfluous code make the program unnecessary complex, but also indicate significant logic errors.
And even in the absence of logic errors, they waste computing resources in case the compiler is not able to optimize them away.

Unused values typically showcase a discrepancy between what a developer intended and what is specified in the code and should be removed to uncover and eventually prevent logic errors.

== How to fix it

Remove unused values and superfluous code.

=== Code examples

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
int foo(int y) {

>   int x = 0;

Reviewer: Does the rule flag zero-initialization?
if it does, this marker is missing:
```suggestion
  int x = 0; // Noncompliant: dead store
```

Author: I just checked, it doesn't.

  x = 100; // Noncompliant: dead store
  x = 200;
  return x + y;
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
int foo(int y) {
  int x = 200; // Compliant: no unnecessary assignment
  return x + y;
}
----

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
int bar();
int buz();

int foo(bool b) {
  int x = 0;
  if (b) {
    x = bar();
    return x;
  }
  if (x != 0) {
    int y = buz();
    y += 9001; // Noncompliant: dead store
  }
  return x;
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=compliant]
----
int bar();
int buz();

int foo(bool b) {
  int x = 0;
  if (b) {
    x = bar();
    return x;
  }
  // Compliant: no more dead stores and superfluous code
  // Assuming call to buz() had no important side effects
  return x;
}
----

=== Pitfalls

When removing unused values and superfluous code, make sure that the right-hand side of a given assignment has no side effects.

While it is safe to remove the call to `square` in the following code since it has no side effects, removing the call to `fwrite` changes the program's behavior.

> Still, values that are never read such as `n_items` indicate code smells that should be mitigated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Still, values that are never read such as `n` indicate code smells that should be mitigated.
```

In this code example, the return value of `fwrite` should be checked and any potential error should be handled appropriately.

[source,cpp]
----
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>

int square(int n) {
  return n * n;
}

int foo(int i) {
  int sq = square(i); // Noncompliant: dead store, assignment can be removed
  const char* const str = "Hello, World!\n";
  // Although `n` is never read, the call to `fwrite` cannot be removed due to side effects
  size_t n = fwrite(str, sizeof(char), strlen(str), stdout); // Noncompliant: `n` is never read
  return i + 9001;
}
----

=== Going the extra mile

In {cpp}17, the `nodiscard` attribute has been introduced which can be used to annotate functions, enumerations and classes.

The attribute serves as a hint to the compiler and to other developers that a function's return value should not be ignored.

> A function that is marked `nodiscard` or that returns an enumeration or class declared `nodiscard` by value which is used in a discarded-value expression encourages the compiler to issue a warning.

Reviewer: This sentence is pretty complex.
I propose removing some information from it, given it is already pretty remote to the topic of the rule:
```suggestion
A function that is marked `nodiscard`  whose return value is ignored encourages the compiler to issue a warning.
```
Otherwise, please simplify / break it down into simpler sentences
